🔗 Enable external MyST project cross-references (#1180)
executablebooks/mystmd: docs/external-references.md

[](./cross-references.md) for referencing content in your project and [](./citations.md) to cite scholarly work and create bibliographies.
```

(myst-xref)=
## Referencing external MyST projects

When using the HTML renderer for MyST, an API is provided for the deployed site.
This provides pre-parsed, structured content as an AST that can be included in other projects and rendered in a tooltip.

> ```{tip}
> Try adding `.json` at the end of the URL on this page. The data is structured and provides authors, license information,
> as well as the full content in a parsed form that can be used for an inline reference on external pages.
> ```
> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```{tip} Add `.json` to the end of a MyST URL to see its data 
All MyST pages come with a structured data representation that provides authors, license information,
as well as the full content in a parsed form that can be used for an inline reference on external pages.
Try adding `.json` at the end of the URL on this page.
```

````

```{note}

> Currently cross-project links aren't fully implemented, check back soon!

Reviewer: 🚀

Reviewer 2: A lot of work to remove that note...!

> In your project configuration, include the `references` object with named links out to the external MyST projects that you will reference in your project. The example below loads cross references from these MyST docs; these paths, and all other MyST projects, allow this by exposing a `myst.xref.json` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your project configuration, include the `references` object with named links out to the external MyST projects that you will reference in your project. The example below shows how you would load cross references that are pulled from the MyST documentation.
```

```yaml
references:
  myst-guide: https://mystmd.org/guide
  jtex: https://mystmd.org/jtex
```

When you specify these in your project configuration, MyST will load the remote `myst.xref.json` file,

> and provide access to all of the pages and available reference targets in that project. This `json` file will be cached to disk locally in the `_build` folder, eliminating duplicate web requests on subsequent builds. If the target documentation updates and you must reload the remote references, you may delete the cache with `myst clean --cache`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you specify these in your project configuration, MyST will load the cross-references and provide access to all of the pages and reference targets in that project.

References will be cached to disk locally in the `_build` folder, eliminating duplicate web requests on subsequent builds. To delete the cache and manually re-load the references, run `myst clean --cache`.
```

Reviewer 2: merged in

protocol
: The protocol for this type of link is `xref:`, and is what selects for cross-project referencing.

project
: the `project` key above is "jtex" which is defined in your local [project configuration](#myst-xref-config) above.

path
: the `path` is everything that follows the project before the `#`. It corresponds directly to the URL path in the MyST site. In the example above, path is "/template-rules"
: Path is optional in most cases; the `target` can be resolved against the entire project without the path. An exception to this is headings without an explicit label in the source markdown - these will require path.

target
: The target is everything that follows the `#` and is a named reference in the project. In the example above it is "syntax".
: Target is also optional - if not provided, the cross reference will simply link to a page in the external MyST project. However, without the target, there will not be a rendered tooltip.
: When creating a cross reference, you can determine `path` and `target` by simply navigating to your target content in the external MyST project and copying the path and fragment from the URL.

> If no link text is provided, e.g. `[](xref:...)`, text will be generated from the external project at build-time. You may of course override this behavior by providing you own text, `[text](xref:...)`.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
If no link text is provided, e.g. `[](xref:...)`, text will be generated from the external project at build-time. You may of course override this behavior by providing you own text, `[text](xref:...)`.

```{tip} References are stored in a `myst.xref.json` file

All MyST sites published to the web expose a `myst.xref.json` file that contains all of the cross-references information about a MyST site.
This file is what MyST pulls when you point to an external MyST site for cross-referencing.
It is also a machine-readable record that can be used for analyzing the cross-referencing behavior of MyST projects.
```
````

Reviewer: I tried to move conversation about the `.json` blob to the end of this section, since it feels more like an "expert feature" to me that isn't immediately relevant for understanding how to reference. I figure putting it at the end helps separate out the topics a bit more.

Reviewer 2: Nice, moved and merged.

> If no link text is provided, e.g. `[](xref:...)`, text will be generated from the external project at build-time. You may of course override this behavior by providing you own text, `[text](xref:...)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no link text is provided, e.g. `[](xref:...)`, text will be generated from the external project at build-time. You may override this behavior by providing you own text, `[text](xref:...)`.
```
